well welcome to the
next
experimental
live stream
um
again no pre-planning i don't really
know what i'm talking about here what
i'm going to talk about i may also not
know what i'm talking about but i wrote
in the description for this one just a
whole bunch of i don't know
words that convey the theme of things
that i often talk about on
podcast
in the prepared podcasts or interviews
that i've given and so on
physics philosophy optimism origins
science sophistry astronomy ai
epistemology ethics mathematics morality
creativity and capitalism wealth wisdom
prophecies predictions
life the universe and everything
or as i like to say
the three r's are what i think the three
r's really should be rationality reason
and reality so i suppose i could pick up
on any one of those themes and tease
them apart
what about this idea of prophecy and
prediction
it's a thing i talk about
very often
it's
in part the distinction between
pessimism and optimism as well or it
leads people to tend in one direction or
another when they think that their ideas
can do things they can't
in particular the thing that those
ideas they have cannot do
is provide an accurate
picture of the future
it's not able to forecast the future
and so this distinguishes between
a prediction and a prophecy both are
claims about the future about what is
going to happen
the distinction is
that in the physical sciences sometimes
if we're lucky
we can derive from our good explanations
of the world our good theories
predictions
and this is very true of physics in
particular but not always
it seems to be a
common notion that the purpose of
science
is
to predict
that that is one of the fundamental
reasons that science exists at all in
the first place and perhaps the only
reason
and we disagree with this there's a
number of reasons we disagree with this
and i'll come to those but just the way
in which prediction works
we can use newtonian mechanics let's say
to predict
get an estimate for how long it will
take if
something is dropped out of a window
from a 10-story building we assume that
you know the acceleration due to gravity
is 9.8 meters per second per second
we know what the height of that window
happens to be and we can determine the
time taken for the thing to fall to the
ground that's a prediction
it is a logical derivation using the
equations of motion that allow us to
figure out how long something takes
assuming nothing intervenes
it's a reasonable assumption sometimes
but sometimes it's not
and even within physics we have
variables like
our air resistance friction that can get
in the way of making even accurate
predictions for such a simple system as
that
the trope example that i've used before
as well is
in chemistry you know i know that when i
mix an acid and a base i will get a salt
and water being produced that's a
prediction give me any acid hydrochloric
acid give me any base
sodium hydroxide mix them together i'm
going to get water
and sodium chloride salt water in other
words that's a prediction a logical
derivation from the deep theory about
how chemistry works
can everyone hear me am i am i coming
through there's nothing happening in the
chat so i'm just concerned that um
audio might not be working but
we'll persevere
and so
in the physical sciences we are how good
excellent
we've got audio there so in the physical
sciences we can do this
we can apply in particular in the
physical sciences where we have
laws of physics
which allow us to
reduce
reality in some narrow respects
to
mathematical formulae describing
particular things that happen
like the falling of objects or the
sliding of things down planes
the movement of celestial bodies
around the sun around other stars we can
we can predict these things
but now
in the realm of human affairs
we have systems that not only are far
more complex and we can't account for
all the variables but
the crucial difference here in the arena
where people
are causal agents in what's going on
they're creating knowledge and if they
create knowledge they genuinely create
knowledge
that the content of that knowledge
cannot be predicted ahead of time
and why because it's a genuine act of
creation if you could predict it ahead
of time then you would have it at that
moment
and therefore it wouldn't be a creation
in the future it would be a thing that
you've got now
we can't do that and even in principle i
would say
we can't do it as well but put that
aside
what then happens is
scientists in particular
but lots of intellectuals conflate both
claims about reality as being rather the
same thing and they will use this word
prediction
to talk about
what the world is going to be like in
2030 or 2050 or 2100
never mind what the climate itself will
be like but what technology is going to
exist then
what society could be like now we all
enjoy you know
guessing and imagining the world is the
future
but the fact is we cannot know the world
of the future because we cannot know
the explanations
that
in particular scientists will devise
about phenomena yet to be discovered
and which will change
not only technology
but will radically transform the way in
which we envisage ourselves and the rest
of the world that we find ourselves in
so therefore anyone today
who is making a claim about the distant
future forecasting what things are going
to be like in the realm of human affairs
is prophesying
very little difference between the
prophet of today
who may have phds behind their name and
the prophets of the past
literally looking into crystal balls
one has bayesian inference generation
the other one has a direct line to the
divine both of them are claiming things
claiming to know things they cannot know
and the thing about prophecy is it's
biased towards pessimism
because people can imagine all the ways
in which
things can go wrong
but they very
rarely imagine all the solutions that
people will creatively come up with
any questions at all from anyone
thoughts arjun
how junior is here to ask thoughts on
laws
don't they inhibit some form of
creativity without them but without them
won't things be a disaster now
do you mean
laws as in
the legal system
laws created by
nation states and democracies
in order to prohibit certain behaviors
presumably you don't mean
laws of physics the laws of nature laws
and physical laws of nature
place prohibitions on what can be done
physically in the universe
but then that's those prohibitions don't
actually ever cause any problems for us
we can
achieve precisely what we want to
achieve and in fact
allow us to
solve the problems
that are soluble which is all of them
arjun you've said yes exactly but yes
exactly to what
i presume
you're meaning okay legal legal okay so
the legal stuff
yeah it depends upon the law it depends
upon the law don't they inhibit some
form of creativity if the law yes yes
the answer's short answer is yes they do
but if the law is of course
you shall not you shall not i'm talking
like it's a commandment
but you know prohibitions against
assaulting people prohibitions against
theft prohibitions against murder all of
these are laws and quite rightly
not only do they not inhibit creativity
and they are the very means by which
creativity is allowed to flourish
in civilization
civilization requires that we have
prohibitions on certain things
so that creativity is not destroyed
and
the major form of creativity in our
world right now is of course
the capacity of human beings to generate
explanations that's the most powerful
form of creativity in the universe prior
to that the only form of creativity that
existed was the one
that arose due to evolution by natural
selection which created different
species
now today we have
this capacity to create explanations
inherent within us it is our nature if
anything is
and
laws at their best are able to
facilitate
the
cooperation between people to maxim to
help maximize creativity so
there's that side of the
of the ledger
but
what makes laws
governments make laws
justice system makes laws you know the
laws of precedence
and the justice system and
parliaments congresses senates
they're made of people
and people are of course fallible
and so sometimes they'll make bad laws
and they might not
consciously be working towards evil in
fact i think they think that they're
always doing the best
but you know
there's no perfect system for generating
laws so there will be errors in the
generation of laws sometimes
and therefore regulations will be put in
place that
do curb creativity
and it is a problem that we have now
and if you gather large groups of people
with authority and power even if
democratically elected into a place
the expectation is they'll do something
which is a worry
sometimes don't you just want them to
sit there and do nothing this is why one
of the beauties of
um
one of the great virtues of
certain systems in the west
the westminster system
the american system as well
what people regard as being
a great vice of the system a problem
with the system
which is sometimes things grind to a
halt and nothing appears to be getting
done
others
others in our tradition think that is a
great virtue that when the senate for
example in the united states
prohibits the congress from enacting
some legislation and there is so-called
gridlock
we think that's good
we think that
means that
the
the parliaments the elected officials
are being prevented from doing a bad
thing quite often the system itself is
working in the way that it should
slowing things down allowing people the
time to reconsider
now maybe sometimes you want the
legislation to go through more quickly
and there's problems with that as well
so there's the flip side to that
look at the story that um went out on
twitter just yesterday that was a that
was a fascinating one let me
bring it up because i read through
this entire article
and
my goodness i'll just read the part of
the article that i tweeted out
i said in my tweet this was a this was a
post by
a person who goes by the the twitter
name
at the zv
okay so at t h e z z v i
and he read an article on substance
about
vaccine
um updates in the united states so the
production of new vaccines every time
there's a new strain we want a
means the virus has altered in some way
and therefore our vaccines need to be
altered in some way
in the united states the people
controlling
the the rate at which vaccines are being
produced are in part the government
agency known as the food and drug
authority the fda and they're slowing
things down rather than just allowing
the free market to do its thing
to produce vaccines as rapidly
as the virus itself is mutating
now you might think well they have the
best interest of people at heart but i
think they have entirely the wrong
philosophy about these things
the part of the article that i
tweeted let me just read it well in fact
my tweet goes like this
i've said the entire post linked below
is astonishing and well worth reading i
should add
regulators regulators slowing down
vaccine production and why well there
are no good reasons a highlight among
them for me is that one of the expert
immunologists advising the fda on
producing new vaccines for new covert
strains has said and by the way i looked
up this guy
and found out his background and you
know he is an immunologist he's an
expert he's a world renowned expert in
these things
he's advising the fda on what they
should do
with
allowing the drug companies fizer
whoever else moderna etc
allowing them to put vaccines out there
to market so that people can get their
vaccines and be protected against new
strains of the virus in some cases
what is said to be worse strains of the
virus for people anyway so this person
has said
this person advising
the fda has said quote
i'm uncomfortable with the us having a
vaccine that's not accessible to the
rest of the world
perlman said noting there's already a
perception that the us and other wealthy
countries have put themselves first
he goes on to say
quote and if we're saying that a
bivalent vaccine is so much better but
it's not accessible to much of the world
i think that's ultimately a bad thing
for getting vaccines out to the whole
world
so he's concerned that we shouldn't
allow the united states to mass produce
vaccines
and allow their own people to have them
first
unless the entire world can have it
simultaneously but that's just not a
possible technological situation to be
in ever
so before we get into that let's just
say
the fda has the power so therefore there
is this law
that gives them the
authority the power to
prevent a vaccine from
reaching the market from reaching the
people it needs to reach and why
why do they do what they do because
experts advise them experts like that
who have this philosophy that unless
everyone in the world can have the
vaccine
then no one should have the vaccine
because it's inequitable
but new technologies by definition when
they're invented
must be rare
because they're new
and so only some people will have them
at the moment space travel is
only for the most wealthy
but we need to go through that phase and
these people out there that say things
like oh what a waste of money
you know they there are people starving
on earth and meanwhile we have
multi multi millionaires and
billionaires taking
um
rides into space for entertainment if
they don't do that
if people
aren't able to push the frontiers
forward by investing vast amounts of
wealth
into doing seemingly frivolous things
but which are testing systems and taking
risks one must say
then it will be available to no one
because we won't have gone through the
phase where people are spending a lot of
money to push the frontie forward and
the same is true of
vaccines
we need some people to have it first
it's going to be expensive the wealthy
countries
need to be able to invest in these
things
and the wealthy people pay taxes to
their government so and possibly even
pay for the vaccine itself so that
the cost of the vaccine comes down and
then everyone can have it this is what
has happened over time all the time
and so yeah this is the flip side of
regulation as you say arjun
you know this is the bad kind of law
when regulations are put in place that
interfere in the market
then we have
severe problems
that can actually cause in this case
deaths of people it will slow down
vaccine production
it has already
and there will be some people who
otherwise would have gotten the vaccine
who don't get the vaccine in time and
will die so that's how serious this is
or because
the road to good
the road to hell is paved paved with
good intentions as people say no doubt
that man's a nice man that immunologist
he wants to do the right thing he wants
the poor people
to have the vaccines in the third the
so-called third world now
that that america has of course we all
do but that would be magic to assume
that everyone can have it at the same
time
it's not possible
vaccines cost money to produce
the only way that vaccines continue to
be produced is if the pharmaceutical
companies make vast profits good for
them they're doing a great job
is it error prone of course it is okay
so that's arjun's
question
what has covert shown on the optimistic
side of humans nick nick nichole the
kyle
has asked
um well
look how quickly the vaccine was
produced in the united kingdom
that first vaccine came out very quick
because ah
you may get a little political here
other countries in the european union
were bound by regulations that
britain had escaped and so britain was
able to
not worry about the regulators
in the european union or anywhere else
for that matter
they were able to get in there the
oxford university scientist and producer
vaccine more rapidly than it happened
before
so that's optimistic that's great
a similar thing happened in the united
states for the first round of vaccines
so what was it called
there was a name of the project i forget
now okay under donald trump anyway and
they got they got the they got the
vaccine to happen very quickly uh when
they needed to they relaxed regulations
but now they're back to the old system
of regulating things so um i think that
that showed a
a willingness of
people
to
accept that there was a serious problem
and to do something about the serious
problem when they were presented with
the clear and present danger of the
problem
which initially
wasn't too politicized
now i'm not going to go down the covered
road of all the ways in which became
politicized and the irrationalities that
people took on but that the coming up
with the vaccine is certainly a source
of great optimism i think that we can
have
for people and for science and
scientists
upvote comment um
i see western problem mostly cultural
problem all that internal conflict
mainly comes from too much freedom and
editability of social norm
the social norms i don't think are
that editable we go through
these spasms of irrationality now and
again and yeah there's some some of that
happening right now
but
that's a consequence of being a dynamic
society
far better to have a dynamic society
that is changing
due to freedom due to liberty
then the alternative which is stasis and
being entrenched in certain ideas not
being creative
there can be no
royal road to perfect progress
and a utopia we don't want a utopia
we don't want the ideal society
what we want is
continual improvement
and a dynamic society offers that
it admits that problems are inevitable
so there can be no utopia because we
exist in the universe where problems are
going to be encountered of necessity
because the universe may very well be
infinite and if it's not it's
effectively infinite
and from any direction
comets or asteroids could come
or virus new viruses could come
or who knows what could come from any
direction problems can come from
anywhere
they're unpredictable
by their very nature otherwise they
wouldn't be problems if we could predict
them ahead of time
and so because of this a dynamic society
is best able to deal with those
but it's not
unproblematic it's not without problems
it just admits that there will always be
problems so
you know i see western problem mostly
cultural problems all internal conflict
mainly comes from too much i don't think
too much freedom there's no i don't
think there's
any such thing freedom properly
understood i should say
this is where i disagree with the
anarchists
i don't think anarchy is necessarily a
state of perfect freedom
if people were always reasonable if
human beings were always reasonable and
able to
not fall into irrationality and not make
mistakes then yeah anarchy would be a
way to organize a society whatever that
word would then label in a situation
where everyone just does whatever they
want all the time
because no one would ever get into a
conflict
because they would in so they would just
be using
reason
and reasoning through problems without
violence
but
the issue is that people do make
mistakes
reason itself is open to being
understood ever better
in ever more fine-grained detail and so
two people
who otherwise regard themselves as
perfectly reasonable can still
be at loggerheads
and this is why the traditions of the
west and the enlightenment
that exist for the resolution of
conflict
are
superior to
any alternative hitherto thought of
dreamed of where the tyranny
where the strong man at the top the
philosopher king tells one what to do
using authority
or a state of complete anarchy where
there is no such institution or
tradition requiring people to behave in
a certain way
so i think that we have the
we have the balance as right as we know
how to have it right now
which is why i am not a supporter of
revolution and radical changes to
democratic systems because the
democratic systems
contain within them inexplicit knowledge
about how a society should run can run
and can correct its errors most rapidly
over time could there be improvements of
course what are they that's difficult to
say that's far more difficult to say
nikhil
this is same like monarchy has high
growth of development rate because of
their fast decision-making but democracy
does not
for example
the fastest growth has absolutely
occurred in places like the united
states the united states
is the wealthiest nation by a long shot
around the world
and it is
a
it has fast development i mean there's
no
analog to silicon valley anywhere
yeah
so
but you know
australia the united kingdom
we are constitutional monarchies
and i happen to think that that is
even better
than the system in the united states
because
there is a constant
namely the royal family
and there is a variable namely the
parliament
and it doesn't really matter who holds
the chair of head of state
it could be anyone but you know we have
this this unelected person
good
it doesn't matter if
non-rulers are unelected
rulers need to be elected because they
make the rules and you need to have a
system where you can remove bad rules
and bad rulers without violence
and that's what voting is about and
that's what democracy is about but the
queen of england is not a ruler
she does not make rules the royal family
do not make rules
there are arbiters of a client
that should the deadlock happen should
the emergency happen should the
constitutional crisis happen
then there is someone
who is
able to make the decision to
get the ball running again
get the ball rolling again one should
say
so if if if the terrible tragedy happens
in one way shape or form that
the parliamentary system
in the united kingdom or in australia
grinds completely to a halt
there is this person who can
call for new elections it's basically
the system in place it's happened once
in australia's history
uh it wasn't the queen that did it it's
the queen's designated person who is the
governor general in the case of
australia who was able to dissolve
parliament it was very controversial but
nonetheless you know the parliament got
dissolved there were new elections and
things went on
okay rather than
uh
the the the the complete crisis that
could have happened
persisting so so yeah constitutional
monarchies
i think happen to be
uh an excellent system for governance in
australia there's a big
movement called the republican movement
they want to
have an australian head of state they
say and we have the governor general so
but we want to elect this person called
the australian president would be the
head of state who would replace the
queen i think that's a terrible idea the
reason i think it's a terrible idea is
because
if you have an election
then that means you have candidates the
candidates will have
policy promises
so you'll have competing presidents
saying this is what i'll do as president
and the other person saying this is what
i'll do as president
and therefore they they have to follow
through on their promises somehow
there's another seat of power but we
have a system in australia where there's
a senate and there's a house of
representatives and that's where the
real power resides in fact it resides in
the executive government but if you have
this president who's been elected then
they'll have power as well they'll
certainly have influence
because you know they may very well win
a majority and what if
we win a massive majority rather
and what if they win a massive majority
and they come from one particular
political party which is different to
the government
who wins that tussle given the president
is able to
um remove governments
so it's a very complicated whole thing
but this is why again i go back to
constitutional monarchy
it seems to have solved the problem and
the problem is how do you organize
society so that rulers can be most
easily removed that's what democracy is
all about remove them most easily
without violence
and allow the progress to keep happening
you know that's why
great britain
works as well as it does for as long as
it does for centuries okay let's keep
going
um
any more questions
from bjorn alvin david has said that in
part why
the utilitarian theory of morality is
wrong
preferences can be morally wrong from
the perspective of critical rationalism
do you think there are
such preferences
morally wrong preferences are absolutely
you can have morally wrong preferences
just because you prefer something
doesn't mean that
you're preferring the right thing then
you might you might
have a have a preference for stealing
things from people but that doesn't make
it right so
yes
um
so
the utilitarian theory this idea that we
should do what maximizes well-being or
maximizes happiness
the great problem i say with that is it
goes back to this
the way in which i started just a live
stream prophecy we can't know you can't
calculate
how much happiness is going to be
generated by whatever it is that you do
and i don't think you even have a good
theory
necessarily
instead what morality is about is
solving problems at a particular time
now if there is a way in which to reduce
suffering absolutely
that seems to be
do you have a good explanation of of
of being better than any rival
explanation for how to reduce suffering
but remember also in our
understanding of what we're calling
critical rationalism there
uh
we
we don't think there is any sort of
perfect
theory anyway the theories are always
revisable we can always
come up with improvements to whatever we
think our present best theory happens to
be
and
so that's why we say that morality is
about
solving moral problems as science is
about solving scientific problems
rather than in science saying well here
we've got general relativity there once
and for all is our theory of gravity
which is just going to stand forever
so too with
morality i think that with
less accuracy do we know morality and
some of these things are useful
heuristics you know the ten commandments
can be useful heuristics i suppose
utilitarianism can be a useful heuristic
but as for a foundation for morality we
don't need any such thing
um
adil
i was asked hi bret a question is
evolution by natural selection a special
case of popper's theory of conjectures
and reputations after all
it all comes back to instantiated
knowledge right yes
yeah um evolution by natural selection
is the means by which
uh
the genetic code i suppose for want of
another word
has found
for
allowing genes to survive or not to
select four genes to create the
knowledge
that
enables an organism to survive in a
particular environment it's not
explanatory knowledge but it's knowledge
it's
rank trial and error okay the mutation
happens
in the dna somewhere of the organism and
either
in most cases
the mutation is such that it is
detrimental to the life of that organism
because it no longer is fit for the
environment or in the very rare case
the
mutation is
good for
that
organism and so it goes on to survive
and that is that is knowledge creation
because it's useful information from the
perspective of the organism or the
species a problem has been solved
enabling it to survive
better in a given environment
speaking loosely with those things but
yes so it is a special kind of
conjecturing refutation the mutation is
a kind of conjecture
a blind conjecture utterly blind
conjecture the most most of which will
be completely
detrimental
or useless perhaps to the organism and
only some of which
will go on to make the organism more fit
for that environment and it is the
environment that is doing the
refutations
selecting against the weaker organisms
so yes
absolutely it's a kind of knowledge but
of course papa was mainly talking about
explanatory knowledge explanatory
knowledge and and and knowledge more
generally that is since that people
generate
there's a whole bunch of
that is this a weekly thing now i don't
know i don't know if i'm going to do
this weekly maybe not um
we'll see
perhaps
pacify software what are good approaches
to deal with people that do not want to
keep their positions open for criticism
notably when those people are your
friends
you treat them as your friends i mean
you just
leave them be
there there's no reason to force someone
to engage in a discussion on a topic
that they don't want to engage in
there's no reason
as a so-called critical rationalist
to go around criticizing everyone
there's no reason to evangelize to
everyone you know in your social circle
there's no reason to persuade anyone
that's not necessary either if someone
asks and they're interested and they
want to engage in the discussion then
engage in the discussion i suppose um
what are
if they don't want to keep their
position open for criticism
i just take them seriously honestly
don't criticize them don't engage in the
discussion then you say oh we've got
nothing to talk about well that's a
problem find something to talk about
where
you can have a profitable discussion
now you may very well be also asking
what about the situations where often in
politics let's say
the person ostensibly says they want to
engage in a political discussion with
you and you are engaging in political
discussion with them but you're unable
to persuade them
they appear to you
to not want their position open for
criticism
well again all i can say is that
you
you can only meet people where they are
and if they
seem to be indicating by their behaviors
and words that they don't want to be
criticized
then
i guess you could observe that out loud
it's very hard to do without insulting
someone
you know
it seems like you don't want to change
your mind it seems like you're not
opening to change your mind it seems
like you refuse to consider okay all of
these things are like loaded
so better to um
it's almost like the constituent you
know where of we cannot speak thereof we
must remain silent if they really
if you genuinely believe the person
doesn't want
to
have their position criticized
then all you can do is not criticize it
because it's it's not going to be
productive
in
forcing the issue
it's a form of coercion then if the
person doesn't want criticism and you're
providing criticism that's coercion
that's coercive
um they've asked you presumably or at
least indicated perhaps non-verbally
they don't want this criticism and yet
you're persisting so then the problem is
with you not with them is what i would
suggest
i'd like to ask what is brett hall's
principle for decision making
well it depends upon the situation but
it's
it's just whether or not one has
a good explanation
an intuition
no explanation at all
uh these are the situations that one can
be in
you either have a good explanation
um you'd um you have
a hint an intuition
or you don't know okay these are your
three options is what i would say in
general and so faced with the decision
about what to do well if i have a good
explanation then
i do what the good explanation would
tell me
what's the decision should i cross the
road right now okay there's a bus coming
good explanation my theory is that that
object rushing down the road at 60
kilometers an hour is a bus
i've decided not to cross the road
it's
now night time
i've got my
headphones in
it's dark i can't see
now
i'm at the same crossroad
i don't know
so i need to go about gathering
um evidence in order to refute the
theory there's a bus coming down the
street
with slights turned out presumably
because i can't see it you know so then
i make the decision to do what it takes
in order to collect the data to refute
the theory there is in fact a bus okay
so this is what i think we do
now what's the point of saying any of
that well this is different to the way
in which this is normally taught or
explained which is the idea that we
weigh options i don't think we ever do
we don't well the fact is we don't
um
weighing options would require you to
you know weighing with what if we take
this literally and they they mean it
literally
what's the unit of weight
i said probabilistically you know you
can assign a probability how
the interesting thing is you investigate
that kind of bayesian reasoning
how people come up with their priors in
the first place
and it's educated
guess
guesswork
they're guessing they're conjecturing
they're putting a number on it but it's
worse than
normal scientific conjecture which
requires a coherent explanation to
account for the phenomena in this case
it's just a number it's a feeling it's
an emotion
um
it doesn't matter if you're an expert or
not in fact experts in these cases often
are more prone to a certain kind of
error a systematic way of thinking about
their own field that can be mistaken
look at physics after all
you know prior to einstein no one could
think of relativity except for einstein
because they had a systematic way of
thinking about physics that it had to be
done in a certain way
and that led them to just thinking in
the same way all the time so just
because they were experts in physics
actually made
the majority of them
poorly placed to come up with the
replacement
of newtonian physics
so yes
decision making always comes down to
the presence or absence of good
explanations and if you have a good
explanation that guides what your theory
what your decision is going to be
absent a good explanation then you don't
know what to do
and you should probably go about finding
more information that can inform you
there are situations where you have
intuitions inexplicit knowledge a
feeling that something isn't quite right
you go for a job interview let's say
and
everything goes well and it's a job that
you really want and then you go home and
you reflect you get offered the job but
there's something there
there's something you can't quite
articulate
didn't feel right
the person interviewing you might have
been looking at you a little bit weirdly
a little bit strangely you can't exactly
say why you just don't feel right about
it
now that is inexplicit knowledge that is
you are getting clues about the
environment from the other person which
need to be a pain which you need to pay
attention to you don't have a good
explanation
as to why it is you feel bad about this
even though it might be the ideal job
even though everything about the
situation might seem to you to be good
you have a sense that something's not
quite right so what do you do then well
you don't know you're in a position of
again not knowing
but it is a strong clue because if you
were just relying on your explicit
knowledge
then you would say well i've got a good
explanation i want this job
the person seemed friendly enough
it pays well
the current position i mean isn't good
my good explanation my explanation is
i should take the position
but you have this niggling feeling you
have an intuition which is not exactly a
refutation of the good explanation but
it's data
it's evidence of some kind it's an
observation you've made it is something
you need to resolve it's a problem
and so this inexplicit stuff you have to
resolve it somehow how do you do it you
ring up you ring up the the company and
you you you talk more to the people
there
you maybe talk to some of the
subordinates of the person who
interviewed you
maybe they tell you maybe they they they
convey the message that this isn't a
very nice boss this isn't someone you
want to work for
you do a little bit more digging and you
find out ah that's what i was sensing i
was sensing that this person was a bit
of a sleazebag or something or other so
yes
i think they're the three kinds of
ways in which you you you can be with
respect to a decision you have a good
explanation make the decision
you have an intuition
about something that you should do but
you can't quite put it into words that's
another situation where
more data needs to be gathered in order
to
finally resolve it but you have to pay
attention to these intuitions and
finally you have no information at all
you really don't know what are we going
to have for dinner tonight i don't know
chinese indian pizza kfc i don't know
you're mentally flipping a coin of a
kind you don't have a good explanation
about which way to go
maybe you just don't care enough this is
the kind of decision that nothing turns
on really
so
um you can be in that situation rather
often of just not knowing just not
knowing uh
in which case the the the the resolution
could be just pick one just do the thing
just pick it um
outsourcing it to someone else who might
be interested in making that decision
you know you live with someone else who
really doesn't like pizza well there you
go you know
they will make the decision for you and
you don't mind
bjorn isn't the point of morality to
ensure that we can in principle
we can in principle as rational beings
solve problems
love thy neighbor as yourself as
practical but it's not about trying to
achieve some effect
i think
um
immorality yeah it the these heuristics
that that kind of the golden rule
love thy neighbor as myself or what's
the platinum rule
um
love thy neighbor as they want to be
loved okay you know
um treat others as you would want to be
treated the golden rule treat others as
they want to be treated platinum rule
better okay treat others as they want to
be treated because they might not want
to be treated the way you want to be
treated um
but yeah i still come back to the point
of morale the point of morality is to
solve problems so yes and that's what
that that's what you said
um
and love thy neighbor as thyself well
modulo what i've just said about the
fact that i don't think that that
necessarily is true in all cases
some people don't want to be loved
in the way maybe you hate yourself you
know some people are in this unfortunate
position and if you hate yourself then
you don't want to love your neighbor as
yourself
do you you've got
psychological trauma and issues which
make you hate yourself so you don't want
to actually love your neighbor as
yourself
you want to love your neighbor as they
want to be loved okay so why would we
have these sort of golden rules anyway
these sort of rules of thumb when it
comes to
morality to provide a situation in which
we can cooperate
and get along as a society and a
civilization and i would say ultimately
to make progress and solve our problems
so that's why these things exist out
there you know the first attempts at
morality the religious attempts at
morality were
getting to something true getting to
something true i don't know
it was a slow
incremental evolution
of
knowledge when it came to immorality
these encounters
with
with other civilizations
as well as
a turmoil that might have been going on
within their own civilization allowed
them to figure out these early tribal
communities early religious ideas
to figure out how best
for people to flourish
and so now we we can look back at that
ancient wisdom and figure out whether or
not you know some of that
is
worthwhile
let's see
yeah i've got
the first time i've been able to hide
someone that's great
okay um
more questions do you think bayesian
reasoning is impractical i mean it's
hard to rank all the possible answers
not only is it hard to rank
all the possible answers
there really is many possible answers
this is the great misconception i think
with bayesian
epistemology
of all the misconceptions that are out
there and there are many i've described
bayesian reasoning as
being inductivism in a cheap tuxedo you
know you just it's inductivism and then
add some mathematical formulae on top of
it to give it a veneer of rigor
the issue is
we are rarely in a circumstance where we
ever need to
wait
our
theories or explanations we're not in
that situation
it's hard enough to think of one theory
look
let's think of something
dark energy
this
[Music]
energy that is causing the accelerated
expansion of the universe
we have no clue what it is so how can we
begin waiting theories about it
we don't even have one
forget
numerous ones where we can update our
priors on each of these
different theories that we have these
different hypotheses we have and figure
out ways of waiting we don't even have
one but if we had one
we could regard either as a good
explanation that we can test or not
presumably whatever it is is going to
have to fit in with quantum theory
general relativity it's going to have to
make predictions of its own and when it
does that it will qualify
if it accounts for the phenomena
and is consistent with what we also know
is going to be a good explanation
with no rivals
name your scientific theory
there are typically no rivals it is the
scientific theory there's one
um best case scenario in the history of
sciences we've had two rival
explanations and the purpose of the
crucial test the experiment is to decide
between the theories guest
decide between the series guests
my trope example
that i always talk about
is
general relativity and newtonian
gravity you know these two competed
for some number of years between the
publication of general relativity
whenever that was 1915 something like
that
i think uh
through to eddington's experiment in
we were in a situation
broadly speaking where it wasn't known
which was the correct theory newtonian
gravity or general relativity
but the point of that is that this is a
very very rare occurrence in the history
of science in the history of rationality
and reason broadly speaking we have two
good explanations
genuine rivals
now on the bayesian account
all
observational data
for
centuries testified to the so-called
truth
of newtonian gravity
and then in 1919 arthur eddington and
others did the experiment which refuted
newtonian gravity so
the
the probability of newtonian gravity on
bayesian given bayesian reasoning was at
its highest the day before it was
refuted when it fell to zero this makes
no logical sense i don't understand how
that is supposed to
be a useful way of understanding
what's going on in science
the truth is what is going on in science
is either you have a good explanation
you don't if you do have a good
explanation then you say this solves the
problem of what is going on accounting
for physical reality
um
in some cases like dark energy dark
matter
a more complete understanding of
evolution by natural selection how
viruses work
name your scientific mystery
um
in these situations we don't even have
one theory we have zero theories
it's common to have zero theories if
we're lucky we've got one that we can
rely upon that is a good explanation
and rather often
rather
extremely rarely we have two so forget
about bayesian reasoning whether you
presume oh let's just wait all our eight
or nine different theories we don't we
rarely i don't know of a situation where
that actually
is truly the case and by the way
what we're really interested in
epistemology is
coming up with the theories in the first
place the solutions to problems
the creation of knowledge and bayesian
reasoning doesn't even pretend to do
that
it's supposed to be a way of waiting
theories once we have them and as i said
once we have one then we've got one that
solves the problem
it's not easy to come up with solutions
to
[Music]
problems of how it is that physical
reality operates you know what is the
successor to quantum theory
there are a number of physicists out
there who say that they've got the way
of unifying general relativity and and
quantum theory
but it's not like the bayesian reasoners
are able to do anything
with respect to weighting any of these
instead what we're waiting for is
ways to test these and rule them out
specifically for for the theorists who
are
saying they've got these theories to
themselves suggest the test a way in
which this thing could be tested because
until they do that they might be working
outside of the realm of science or
physical science okay so
bjorn has asked so a policeman cannot
treat a criminal badly
if he does not want it
i don't know what that means
you might have to explain that one
but beyond goes on to say
the point of morality is that you should
sometimes what you want do what you want
is not what you should want which is the
count of the platinum rule coercion must
mean more than someone violating your
subjective preferences
um
people who coerce
might need to be themselves coerced
there's no
lack of logic in that
okay
the rule is
when it comes to coercion don't coerce
avoid coercion
now in the limit sometimes that can be
hard you coerce yourself you
they're we're error-prone and so we can
just engage in behaviors that we don't
don't even realize that we could be
coercing
ourselves and the people around us so
that that that's a thing
but when it comes to criminals
they're actively out there
using force and violence
so the only moral response to that is to
stop them and that requires force
and force is a kind of coercion so yeah
absolutely it doesn't it's not immoral
of course
to defense is not attack these two
things are not symmetrical
if someone attacks you violently
okay then you can call that attack
coercion but thinking that all kinds of
coercion stand on equal footing is
wrong is wrong because
the person who initiates violence this
is the non-aggression policy or whatever
you want to call it okay that the the
truly wrong thing is the person who
first
becomes violent the person who initiates
the violence who initiates the
aggression
they're in the wrong
and so at the moment where they make
that choice that decision
to punch you in the face
then you have every right to do what it
takes to stop them from doing what
they're doing
and that includes by the way
getting restitution
so punch you in the face and try and run
off now you're allowed to go and tackle
them and bring them before a court why
why are you allowed to do that because
our traditions
have
wiser than us in many many cases and
have figured out that if we want the
society to function in the way that we
want them we have to
do these things
so that we can show our disapproval
of certain kinds of behaviors and if
people are allowed to go punching people
in the face
without consequence without then being
coerced themselves
chaos follows okay you might very well
decide not to chase the person
because that could be the smart thing to
do in the given situation
but in generally speaking when when
coercion
violence happens
there needs to be consequences to stop
the coercion so that's that's what we're
saying there
um
alex
alex has asked when you're doing
research do you focus on a few problems
at a time or do you keep many problems
open and search for ideas in an
explanatory fashion
um well insofar as i don't know if i
what i do is research
in
the way that a scientist might think of
it for example
i kind of did that
as part of research projects at
university but nothing ever really
serious um
you know part of my master's degree i
did
research into galaxy collisions so
sometimes you'll hear me reference
galaxy collisions that's the thing that
i kind of half know about
not
not an expert in the sense that a real
astrophysicist would be
but i know something about it so i know
about that kind of research so i've done
that sort of thing
it was fun but not super fun
now if i'm
reading and exploring ideas and if i
suppose if you want to call that
research
what i'm doing is yeah i am absolutely
looking at a
spectrum of problems
from a number of different sources
looking at the way in which for example
feynman might have put things and how
that might be improved papa might have
put things and how that might be
improved the way david deutsch has
expressed things and where he's pointing
us to
or what what these best ideas
what consequences they might have
um
so
do i focus on a few problems at a time
yes i'm in the
luxurious position i guess
uh being fortunate enough
to be able to work on a number of things
simultaneously and that that is very
helpful i think to the creative process
because one thing can naturally lead
into another thing
that things completely disconnected from
my podcast stuff
can be impacted by our podcast stuff and
vice versa
that
i'm able to explore a whole range of
different things so yeah
so
yes i think that answers the question
bjorn why should i treat a person with
coercive preferences the way he wants to
be treated i'm not i'm still not sure
what that means so
does it mean
a person wants to be coerced and so
should i coerce them
well this is a that's almost like a
logical paradox
how can you coerce someone
if that's what they want
if what they want is to be treated in a
particular way how is that coercion
um they might say it
by the way just on this kind of point
it's an edge case
you know a person might have a
kind of you know 0.00001
of the population might have a quirky
mental state where
they take um
pleasure in being told what to do every
single moment of the day let's say but
then you know you might very well argue
they're not actually being coerced if
you do that who'd want to do that though
i don't know
i guess what i would say
if you're in a situation where a person
has coercive preferences
this is a bizarre person why are you in
a relationship with that person
the issue is with you
why are you in this situation get out of
that situation this person's weird
you don't have to do anything for anyone
by the way you don't have to
that that's perhaps a an equally
fundamental rule of human interactions
you do you
someone wants to be treated a certain
way you don't have to treat them at all
the platinum rule is just saying that if
you are in an interaction with someone
you've voluntarily willingly gone into
this interaction with someone and you
need a guide for how to treat the person
you know
here's here's the thing
you see people at shopping centers okay
i used to work in retail in security
my goodness
customers can be awful
there are people out there who
treat people who work in retail in shops
or people who work in restaurants
terribly
customers can be terrible
what is a heuristic for a person
who is
learning about a culture
know a teenager growing up what is a
heuristic they can use
to figure out how to interact with
a person selling stuff who's standing
behind the cash register
i've got the golden rule might be okay
okay treat them the way you'd want to be
treated in that situation if you know
the person okay it's a step further
treat them how they want to be treated
in that situation
some people have the idea that you know
if they're
the customer or something that somehow
rather
you know that somehow or other they they
they're paying for a service and
therefore
what they've got before them as a
servant
which is just an awful way to be and i
saw so much of this
you still see so much of it rudeness
that goes on in retail
this is what i have said jokingly before
tongue-in-cheek you know forget national
service people politicians sometimes on
the conservative side of politics often
say you know we should get
the teenagers into national service they
should all be made to go through the
army
you want to treat people
you know sorry you want to teach people
about other people you want to teach
people and give them a a hazing and
understanding of human nature put them
through retail for a few years
a lot of kids do come out of school and
they get a part-time job somewhere
that's a steep learning curve um yeah so
yeah treat people
um
in the first case treat them how you
would want to be treated presumably you
want to be treated well
and better than that
platinum rule treat them how they want
to be treated
um
yeah
that's just a heuristic that's a
heuristic
um what am i up to jiten hi juton
jutin's a great supporter of the podcast
juden so if we only have one good theory
then what do we do about crucial
experiments wait until another theory
comes up you know there's no there's no
such thing as a crucial experiment
in a situation where you do have only
one theory
a crucial experiment the definition of a
crucial experiment is that test which
decides between two good explanations
it's crucial it's the thing you've got
to do to rule out one theory and in fact
rule out every other theory
that you've thought of
except for the one that you've got of
course as i already said and emphasized
these situations that have arisen only
have usually two
one theory will make prediction x one
theory will make prediction y
you go out into the world you do the
experiment you observe
you see
observation y not x it refutes the other
one
so
that so
jiten says
what do we do about crucial experiments
you don't need to worry about them okay
so what's the purpose of experimentation
then
perhaps to find problems with your
theory okay
so that's the only other it's not a
crucial test i was speaking in the live
stream earlier today about the james
west
james west it's the second time i've
said james west it's james webb james
webb space telescope the space telescope
that's out there
in space it's the successes of the
hubble and not until next month it's
going to release new pictures
of
deep deep space the deepest images of
the universe hitherto
generated by a telescope
we haven't seen them yet they're coming
so
this concept this observation
this telescope constitutes an experiment
but it's not a crucial test
after all what theories are we testing
we're kind of testing our existing
theory of the cosmos
all of them of the big bang stellar
evolution the distribution of galaxies
call it what you like
this telescope
will provide interesting images no
matter what
if it provides what is what is expected
what's expected is
more and more and more galaxies this is
what has happened with for example the
hubble deep field and the hubble ultra
deep field the hubble telescope taking
pictures of dark
places in space revealing more and more
galaxies presumably the james west james
webb space telescope is going to see
more more of the same
it still constitutes an experiment but
it's just
kind of providing us more and more data
consistent with our current explanations
but
there is the chance it will provide the
observation that makes our present
theories problematic
who knows
maybe it will see
distant galaxies
not redshifted but blue shifted coming
towards us i highly doubt this there is
no good explanation that that we have
that suggests that should happen
but let's say it did happen what then
aha then we're in a situation where
we've got a problem we've got a problem
our theories are not refuted yet
because we have no other theory to jump
to but what we have is a problem an
observational problem a few things could
happen one is
someone comes up with a new explanation
a new creative explanation that accounts
for absolutely everything that we've
observed in the universe hitherto and
also for the blue shifted distant red
distant galaxies
problem solved
okay that's the hard
road to take because it requires a new
theory to be created
you know this is this is hard stuff this
is why
um you know einstein is famous because
he was one of the rare people able to do
this why newton was famous you know able
to come up with systems of the world
now the other alternative is
the telescope's made a mistake how well
there's all sorts of imaging processing
that goes on
there's all sorts of electronics in
these telescopes these days who knows
what mistake it could make somewhere
along the way
and so the observation itself
could be in error in some way
and so if we do see these blue shifter
galaxies the galaxies coming towards us
rushing towards us that are you know
billions of light years away but they're
coming towards us when they should be
moving away because the universe is
expanding
it might just turn out that that's not
really what we're seeing
but what we're in fact seeing is some
artifact from the telescope and this has
happened in the history of astronomy
before as well
that we thought we were seeing something
through the telescope and in fact
systematic error as we call it
yeah so that's happened in the history
of astronomy and the history of science
bjorn
popper has said that in order to have a
tolerant society we need to sometimes be
intolerant towards
intolerance is one allowed then to punch
ideas is it acceptable to punch nazis
um
well punching ideas well of course
what we want i i think there's a way to
refine what popular saying to explain a
little bit more he's correct
that we shouldn't tolerate the
intolerance
but we need to tease out
different kinds of intolerance after all
you know just to be silly
someone might be lactose intolerant
but i'm kind of being serious there
because people can be intolerant of all
sorts of things
i can be intolerant of certain kinds of
music should i be tolerated in society
absolutely so what does intolerance mean
well intolerance is
a label for when you're not tolerating
other people or the existence of other
people then we have a problem
what i would say to refine this is what
we want is a situation where we are not
destroying the means of error correction
which has which is a broader and deeper
claim than
popper's claim about tolerance
a person is a means of error correction
we don't want to destroy any means of
error correction so therefore we don't
want to destroy people we don't want to
imprison people hamper people
be violent towards people because that's
destroying a means of error correction
destroying a person is destroying a
means of correction and destroying a
person could be murdering a person we
could also mean just destroying them as
a person by mistreating them
imprisoning them
being racist being prejudiced all that
sort of stuff is destroying the means of
error correction but also
this idea this paradox of tolerance
uh
it's also about speech
and so do not destroy the means very
christian means allow free speech
maximal free speech
and and
you know i differ with some people on
this i think that everyone's
responsible for their own behavior
we don't need to go in into that i
suppose but
um
so we
sometimes need to be intolerant towards
intolerance yes we do is it allowed to
punctuate it we need to counter ideas
criticize ideas it is is it acceptable
to punch nazis in our society and
western civilization
this is what legal systems exist for
this is why we have a legal system
that a person
can stand up and claim to be a nazi
and we can be intolerant towards their
ideas now until such time as they
become violent
are in the immediate position of calling
for violence then no you can't punch
nazis no you can't you can't punch
anyone
this is why we have traditions and
institutions you don't punch people you
call the police
unless of course you've just been
punched by someone
then you can punch them back and the
legal system allows for this okay you're
allowed
self-defense you're allowed to well in
australia i know the australian law
maybe things differ around the world but
in australia you may use that amount of
force required to prevent the violence
from continuing
okay these are rare rare situations by
the way
thank you to bjorn for your donation
thank you very much
um
adil
brett could you please explain what
justified true belief is and why it is
wrong for example does postmodernism
even though it starts itself as
avant-garde still buying to the wrong
concert
great
well this is
this is my hobby horse
so
justified true belief is the
definition or conception of knowledge
gifted to us by plato among others and
has sailed on through the intellectual
traditions of the west and the
enlightenment through today where it is
taken for granted essentially as the
definition of knowledge or insofar as
it's not the definition of knowledge
minor corrections to this definition are
sometimes regarded as being knowledge
so knowledge in order to be knowledge on
this account
needs to be justified as true you need
to have a reason for thinking something
is true
so
we you know on this account
you look out your window and
you see cows and
because you have observed cows you're
justified
in thinking this is true you know there
are cows out there because you've
observed them so this apparently is a
justification that you're truly seeing
cows and so therefore you should believe
this thing if you believe it it's
knowledge
but
knowledge should never be like this
knowledge doesn't need to be believed to
be known
there's all sorts of ways in which we
could be wrong we look out the window we
see
this thing
that looks like a cow
are we justified in thinking it's truly
a cow
yeah in this day and age maybe it's a
it's a very very good hologram of a cow
we could be mistaken we could be
mistaken we might not be justified at
all
that
what could the possible justification be
these photons of light entering our eye
knowledge is as i say information that
solves a problem
now belief is this thing where
it's it has it has a number of different
definitions itself some of which
contradict
some of which stand in stark contrast to
one another on the one hand it could
mean believe think is absolutely true i
believe in god when people say i believe
in god they're not saying
i hope or guess that he's they they are
genuinely saying
something more that's a strong claim
really truly god exists i believe it
but on the other hand you could say
you know um
oh where's john at the moment
um i believe he's in the living room
well then you're sort of saying
not that you truly honestly think that
he is but your best guess is
which gets more to what knowledge is
about right knowledge is more about best
guesses
conjecturing
good explanations
so
what justified true belief is is the old
conception of knowledge that people now
debate about because they want to figure
out what the correct justifications are
what can justify something as true in
mathematics you start off with the
axioms and then you can justify as true
pythagoras theorem
is pythagoras's themed
theorem justified as true
well if the axioms are true then it's
justified as true should you believe it
on this account yes you should because
you've justified it's true and then you
believe it but how do you know the
axioms are true they're not justified
except if you say well
something that's self-evidently true
is justified
[Laughter]
well
how do you know it's self-evident okay
you know in my podcast i did with naval
i go on about that you know there's no
settled mathematics thing and you know
um through any two points you can draw a
unique straight line all that sort of
stuff um
so there are all sorts of things in
mathematics that are thought to be
self-evidently true that turn out not to
be we can always be in error
this
search
for justifications
is always going to produce or always
going to contain possible sources of
error so therefore we can't be justified
or probably justified we don't need to
be we just need to solve our problems
and explain stuff and so knowledge is
information that solves a
problem it is
useful therefore useful information but
we don't need to believe any of it
newtonian gravity didn't need to be
believed
that's the my
best example of this stuff you know we
can use newtonian mechanics and
newtonian gravity to solve problems
today it counts as knowledge
it counts as knowledge
but you're not justified
in thinking it true
because it's not true it's been refuted
but it'll solve a problem it'll solve a
problem of how to get rockets to the
moon how to predict the tides how to
keep bridges up all of this can come
down to newtonian mechanics
but no one should believe it even though
it's knowledge and and it is knowledge
yeah so justified tribulation all wrong
post-modernism yeah
concludes rightly
that it's a fool's errand to try and
justify anything is true you can't do it
but then wrongly concludes on that basis
that because you can't justify things as
true
that therefore knowledge isn't possible
so they get that wrong
papa walked the line
properly between dogmatism where people
say i can justify something as true
i have got the final theory
god's written it down it's there in
nature i can prove it mathematically i'm
justified thinking this is true
therefore i believe it and i'll fight to
the death anyone who says otherwise
that's the dogmatist
who endorses the justified true belief
view of knowledge
and the post-modernist who says well no
what you think is a justified reason for
thinking something is true
isn't a justification at all you can't
know that that thing is true
you can never know something is
absolutely true therefore knowledge
isn't possible
and so you go down that road of
post-modernism and relativism popper
came along and said you're both making a
mistake you're both endorsing this idea
of
justified truth you don't need to
justify things as true you don't need to
believe this stuff
what knowledge is you can know something
and simultaneously know it to be false
but it's going to solve particular
problems
and because you can't justify anything
is true but you can improve it you can
make progress and that goes on
infinitely there's no that's an
unbounded process
so much more optimistic because the
the dogmatist says i've already got the
final truth there's no point trying to
improve on this here we go we've got it
we've got the final truth no progress
possible after
the
the relativist the postmodernist says
it's not possible to get justified truth
anywhere therefore knowledge isn't
possible therefore no program no genuine
progress is possible people
talk like this in academia quite often
it's not
real progress
[Laughter]
so they both agree that progress isn't
possible only if you take on
a view of conjectural knowledge
genuinely
can you really endorse the perspective
that
progress is always possible because you
don't have the final truth
but progress is possible objective
knowledge is possible
there's something to be wrong about out
there in reality
when you make a claim it could be wrong
because there's a reality to the
situation
there is something true
and you can be wrong about it you can
make mistakes objectively
and by correcting those mistakes you
make progress
okay
let's see
could you say something about why poppa
seems to say i'll go through the next
few quickly we'll just do a quick rapid
fire because then i need to go to dinner
here in australia it is 7 19 p.m i
thought i'd do the second one because
it'll give the aussies perhaps a chance
to
come to come onto the website because
they will have finished work for the day
um so i don't know what time is best for
me to do these
live streams if i continue to do them
when
when people are up around the world
being in australia it's either you know
middle of the day for me here is
middle of the night for people in europe
okay anyway so i'm going to do a rapid
fire bunch maybe hang around for another
10 minutes so let's go let's see what we
can get through
could you say something about why papa
seems to say that problem finding might
be more important than solutions
does he i don't know i'm i i hasten to
add i'm not a papa scholar people
sometimes think of me as being some
expert on popper i'm really not i'm a
fan of poppa and i've read as much of
his stuff as i can get a hold of
but i'm not someone who is studying
carefully
what he says
now i would agree with that statement
absolutely that problem finding might be
more important than solutions because
there could be a whole bunch of problems
for which the solution is unimportant so
you don't need to find those solutions
they're not urgent
but absolutely finding the problems is
really really important because this is
why i say rapid progress is our most
pressing problem forget all the other
problems out there that people name all
the time okay let people work on those
i'm not saying forget okay forget is the
wrong word but
forget becoming pessimistic and downcast
and falling into concerns that the world
is going to end because of any one of
these named problems that the
intellectuals and the academics have
come up with
instead be concerned about the rate of
progress because it's the rate of
progress that will allow us to identify
new problems that is why problem finding
is more important than
any given solution
generally speaking
there could be the disaster for which
the solution is needed more urgently
than your problem finding for example if
the asteroid really does appear in the
sky tomorrow
and
nasa and the european space agency and
all the experts converge on predicting
on saying
this thing is going to hit within six
months it's absolutely going to hit the
earth then in that case
all bets are off
we need to focus on that solution that
thing's absolutely going to wipe us out
we've got to do something about it let's
find a solution it's urgent but
generally speaking when we're not in
that position where civilization is
going to be wiped out or you personally
aren't going to die from the growing
tumor that the doctors just informed you
about
in all other situations then you need to
be out there problem finding
both as a civilization individually
because there's
there is some problem out there
more than one problem there's many
problems infinite problems possible that
could wipe us out
and so we need to keep on searching for
them so that we can find the solution to
them in time
but yes so that's why i would say
finding new problems okay which often
comes from solving old problems by the
way that's another way of finding
problems
is
kind of the more important thing but
that just means that fundamental
research is the most important thing
civilizationally speaking fundamental
research
and the most fundamental of all the
sciences is physics and the most
fundamental parts of physics are
people who work on the foundations of
physics and so
that those
foundational areas of physics touch more
areas
of
our intellectual understanding of the
universe than anything else okay i'd
better keep on going
a question from lilly's website i'd like
your view on why is insurance
interestingness a better criterion for
action than importance
um
well i guess important import there's
the
importance is not an objective criteria
people might say that it is
but
interestingness is just what you find
fun
so
i
yeah i don't i don't really know like
you i can i can certainly imagine a
situation
you know where
your health is in danger and you have an
important problem but you're not
interested in which case the important
problem of having
again the tumor removed
[Laughter]
i guess it would be how could you not be
interested in that it has to be
interesting but in the situation where
you're perfectly healthy where
life is going well and whatever else
then yeah you want to pursue your
interests i'd need to be given a
specific example in order to be able to
answer this question
in anything more than universal broad
brush strokes there might not be a
universal answer to this unless
we can
more more better understand the
distinction between interestingness and
importance and i'm sure lulu has that
distinction in mind which i
don't right now um
upvote comment are you aware of nasim
teleb's books absolutely yes yes i've
read um yeah
the black swan
what are your thoughts about them
good i think that the
um
there is
he's certainly popular in some senses
but also i think that he
takes probability seri too seriously as
a universal explanation
that
if you get into this business sometimes
you can get into the
issue of forecasting
prophesying
so
that can be a hazard of
sometimes this approach
um so yeah his books are
well he's his book that i've read
is good but i i don't
follow his work uh in depth but i am if
the question is am i just aware of them
yes i am what are your thoughts about
them good as far as i can tell
a bit heavy on
placing
deep importance on
probability and knowledge of probability
my views on probability are on
my youtube channel
probability and risk
i tend to side with david deutsch on
this
that it's largely a scam because
they're
you know what happens
is determined to happen by the laws of
physics things don't probably happen
they happen
and if you want to guess about the
future either you've got a good
explanation in which case it's a logical
derivation from the scientific theory
you have
or
you don't know
because
knowledge creation is going to have an
impact human choice is going to have an
impact
and in those cases no one has a clue
sometimes you might want to prepare for
the future but that's a whole other
issue and we could talk about that some
other time
how to become better at finding
criticism of one's own ideas
i don't think there's um
any special recipe to this
other than if you're in the position of
asking the question you've already made
95 of the headway i would say
you're already in the position of
thinking where could i possibly be wrong
can i possibly be wrong
and yeah like when it when things become
a problem that's when you want to start
criticizing when you're stuck when
you're not having fun when things aren't
interesting
when things are going wrong it's then
you need to criticize yourself if
everything's going right and you're just
having fun
and you're creating wealth and knowledge
and your relationships are all great
then
why do you want to criticize your ideas
apparently they're solving all of your
problems at a rapid rate and you're just
getting better day after day after day
so there could be a very good reason why
not to go around criticizing you might
think all i can make even still faster
progress and having more fun than what
i'm having you know
maybe
but there's there's something to be said
for
i'm also
enjoying the present moment
of being
at peace with the fact that you've got a
great life
if you do
now if you don't then of course you've
got to start criticizing your ideas so
it's it's that when we're talking about
i'm not a self-help type person but that
is what i would say the distinction is
become so if you are in a situation
where life is not going well how do you
become better at criticizing one's own
ideas it could very well take more than
just you
and many people have made this point
before if you are in a bad situation you
think things are going badly first place
to go is friends and family
absent that then the professional the
psychologist who
all of whom can help you criticize your
ideas other people can see
the problems that you might not be able
to see in yourself sometimes you just
don't know how to criticize your own
ideas that doesn't help of course in
answering the question how can you
become better at criticizing your own
ideas
i
beyond what i've just said i don't know
talking to other people because you can
be blind
to the ideas that need to be criticized
um let's keep going
bjorn deutsche said that there are
anti-rational memes sometimes such ideas
are exchanged in free markets is the
government allowed to intervene and stop
such ideas
through technical means
there are anti-rational means
such ideas are exchanged in free markets
um
an anti-rational meme
is something that
actively causes the holder to
stop criticism
in some way shape or form i'd need to
have a specific example
the free market is just a way in which
people can cooperate
and exchange stuff
money services goods without coercion
should the government be allowed to
intervene and stop such ideas through
technology i say no but again we would
need specifics
should there be a free market in
plutonium
perhaps not
that's another issue
from aaron thank you for your
contribution
i'm learning so much from your podcast
and i'm happy to show my appreciation
thank you very much aaron thank you
kindly
alex joseph agassi has said in his book
joseph agassi in his book on papa
mentioned the latter believed in a moral
duty to work hard do you agree we have
such a duty why it depends upon what
work hard means
i've thought about this a lot recently
because i know some people have the
philosophy of
not working hard
and yet
my observation of them is they work hard
i'm in
sometimes this interesting position
where
i
very much
endorse the ideas of the non-coercion
community
and at the same time simultaneously
i see great value and insight in
the work of someone like jocko willink
you know this ex-navy seal guy who talks
about discipline as freedom and you know
he's this uber masculine
you know tough guy
who gets up at you know 4 30 every
morning and does a workout and
seems to be self-coercing but i don't
think so i think in both cases the
non-coercion people and someone like
that are having fun
jocko's way of life is not a
prescription for happiness for everyone
but for that kind of person it's fun
he would probably look at the
non-coercion people and think that looks
like hell to me
not having
to get up at 4 30 every morning he loves
it you know
so
he works hard and it's obvious to
everyone that he works hard and there's
a lot of people out there you know um
online that you know seem to be
um sort of
what do we say role models for people
and how to work hard you know
get the better body earn more money
become more healthy work hard
it can be coercive absolutely working
hard can be coercive in other words
engaging in activities that you don't
really want to
that
make life not fun
tasks that your boss wants you to do and
you don't really want to do that's all a
problem
but when you're personally in control of
your life entirely as someone like jocko
is he doesn't have to get up at 4 30 in
the morning but he does is he's
self-coercing i just don't think so i
listen to his podcast all the time and
he's having a he's having a ball of a
time
um now he tells other people you know
this is what you should do because if
you do the kind of things he does
then it will help now that's a good
prescription for someone
and jordan peterson does a sort of
similar kind of a thing
where
especially with young men not knowing
what they want to do with their lives
being unhappy with their life just
being a rudderless boat one of my
friends used to say
not knowing in what direction they
should go especially as they move
through their teens into their early 20s
it's it's a it's a big issue for some
people
in that situation where you just don't
know then
whether you go down the road of
non-so-called non-coercion and just
purely having fun all the time or you go
down the jocko road
both might help but
the jocko road could be the one where
you go now i'm enjoying things hey i'm
going to the gym and i'm you know
getting more fit and strong
hey i'm reading more books and i'm
finding this really intellectually
stimulating hey i'm going out and
meeting more people you know you're kind
of
in a sense you know you might call it
forcing or coercing yourself into these
situations that you otherwise wouldn't
because this older wiser person has said
i've been there before and i know what
it's like and
do this
and then you quickly find that
it's like climbing a little hill so
maybe you've got to coerce yourself to
get to the top of the hill but once
you're at the top of the hill
then you're rolling straight on down and
you're having a lot of fun almost like
the roller coaster i suppose you know
it's hard that the and then you sort of
go rushing down and i think this is what
the jocko willing style people of the
world
are all about
so moral duty to work hard i think moral
duty to
find what's fun and then pursue that
as far as possible and if that's working
hard then i'm with poppa it'd just be
interesting to ask papa what he really
meant
i think what he means is you know to
solve problems
and and papa was working at of course at
a particular time
um
a particularly difficult time
for him and so he understood he came
from a culture and and and from
historical circumstances that meant in
order to escape from
the problems that he had
and the style of working hard
is dif was different than to what it is
now and so the prescription for how to
live a life of flourishing may very well
have been different then
to what it is now
we can reinterpret what working hard is
i would say
okay um continue with the live streams
quick fire question is deutsche's
prediction about agis
wrong with how lambda currently seems to
develop uh aaron if i could just point
you to my last live stream it's there on
my video channel i talked about lambda
so i won't go into the full explanation
again now i would just say that the
questions asked of it
could point to consciousness
but i think that's
a very bad explanation it's a very bad
explanation this thing is actually
experiencing consciousness and suffering
and as a creative agi bad explanation
better explanation
it's an advanced chatbot that has been
loaded with
a whole bunch of terms phrases sentences
stock responses
centered around
talking about
personhood
so you know i want to get it on to
talking about some other topics
a range of other topics then let's see
how it does let's see how it does when
it gets off topic um so yeah that's what
i would say about that
um
previous
podcast kind of thing
bjorn again thank you bjorn for your
comments sean hi sean sean knight
good aussie friend um
how do we distinguish between the is and
the ought it seems to me that there is a
liminality a top-down version of our
participation reality that isn't nested
in a rational material landscape
so
if we take on board
the
reality that is given that is taught to
us by physics
i would say that they're
that all possible eases are instantiated
somewhere in this physical reality and
our purpose as human beings is to
determine
um
which of these physical realities we
wish to occupy in greatest measure
there's a lot of loaded jargon there
so is in one way is
using one way is
is is
what exists now now and what the methods
of methodologies of science tell us is
the
what is really going on what our best
explanations of science account for
that's our is ought is the domain of
morality
what could be the case
but isn't yet
so
we distinguish between these two cases
is ought is the
is that we want to make actual but
is at the moment only potential and how
we actualize it is by making choices and
creating knowledge
it's the distinction between
not merely
what is possible but rather what has
already happened in our timeline that's
the years and the ought is
what is yet to happen in our timeline
but we want
and so we can't derive and always ought
from any is
okay humor's right about that
but we can't as david deutsch points out
we can't derive is from is as either you
know just because it is the case that
light is coming
from the sky and we call that a star
doesn't mean it is the case
that for example stars are small
dim and cold
which appears to be what they are in the
sky at night so the is of what we see
does not give us the ears of what they
really are so we can't derive
is from is so forget about ought from is
we can't divide is from his yeah so um
yeah so i think that's
that
um
will you publish this on your short
podcast channel
they should appear in my youtube feed
now
whether or not i should put them onto
audio i don't know you know i've got
you know the apple podcast and all that
sort of stuff whether or not this is
worth turning into
a purely audio thing i don't know
people tell me they can listen via
youtube so yeah i'm not sure
bjorn has entered the discussion with
sean that's good
um about heigl and stuff um as brick
said the final ought to always be to
abide by error correction yeah so
good
fantastic thanks everyone um been a lot
of fun so i will again probably do this
like next week or something like that
but this has been great thank you very
much to the people who um sent through
some support super chat questions that's
a lot of fun as well
until next time which should be next
week sometime i presume
yeah have fun
enjoy yourselves and goodbye